+++
title = "Immanent Critique of the German Character"
author = ["Noah"]
date = 2022-03-12
draft = false
+++

Germany is a stagnant country. Its people are conservative (not in the political sense), backwards, slow, smug, uninformed and lethargic. The french can bring themselves to riot against a government that fucks up too much but the german will just take it, retaliating only by watching unfunny and ineffectual satire on tv, thinking that he is thereby sticking it to his politicians. The german will feel superior to the stupid american meanwhile his country is technologically stuck in the early 2000s. The global public will praise the supposed quality of german engineering, science and technology even though germany has been a second rate player for decades now. Most germans educated in science and technology end up emigrating to other countries that are marginally less shit. Meanwhile he (the german) is utterly unaware of all of this and genuinely believes himself and his country to be, if not superior in the absolute sense, at least better in most respects to the rest of Europe. If the german does realise that his country is flawed, he will, instead of coming to reasonable conclusions, completely give into his innate superstition and fall victim to all sorts of conspiracy theories. Ah yes superstition, there is no better way to illustrate my point than to show just how superstitious the average german is. It should suffice to mention that homeopathic remedies are sold in every pharmacy and most germans seriously believe they work and represent a real alternative to the tyranny of (((big pharma))), of course it would not occur to them to ask "who profits from selling these?". Not to mention his eternal fearmongering over "radiation". The German is so delusional as to be scared of phones and microwaves. I rest my case.